-   [Change log](#change-log)
-   [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
    -   [\
        Scope](#scope)
    -   [\
        Normative references](#normative-references)
        -   [Terms specific to the present
            standard](#terms-specific-to-the-present-standard)
-   [Bibliography](#bibliography)

![](/home/sdias/Desktop/papper_docs/ecss/1-Active_ECSS/generated/ECSS-Q-ST-70-29C(15November2008).docx1//media/image1.png){width="4.157638888888889in"
height="2.55in"}

Space product assurance

> Determination of offgassing products from materials and assembled
> articles to be used in a manned space vehicle crew compartment

**Foreword**

This Standard is one of the series of ECSS Standards intended to be
applied together for the management, engineering and product assurance
in space projects and applications. ECSS is a cooperative effort of the
European Space Agency, national space agencies and European industry
associations for the purpose of developing and maintaining common
standards. Requirements in this Standard are defined in terms of what
shall be accomplished, rather than in terms of how to organize and
perform the necessary work. This allows existing organizational
structures and methods to be applied where they are effective, and for
the structures and methods to evolve as necessary without rewriting the
standards.

This Standard has been prepared by the ECSS Executive Secretariat,
endorsed by the Document and Discipline Focal points, and approved by
the ECSS Technical Authority.

**Disclaimer**

ECSS does not provide any warranty whatsoever, whether expressed,
implied, or statutory, including, but not limited to, any warranty of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose or any warranty that
the contents of the item are error-free. In no respect shall ECSS incur
any liability for any damages, including, but not limited to, direct,
indirect, special, or consequential damages arising out of, resulting
from, or in any way connected to the use of this Standard, whether or
not based upon warranty, business agreement, tort, or otherwise; whether
or not injury was sustained by persons or property or otherwise; and
whether or not loss was sustained from, or arose out of, the results of,
the item, or any services that may be provided by ECSS.

Published by: ESA Requirements and Standards Division

ESTEC, P.O. Box 299,

2200 AG Noordwijk

The Netherlands

Copyright: 2008 © by the European Space Agency for the members of ECSS

 Change log

  ------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ECSS-Q-70-29A      First issue
                     
  30 July 1999       Transforming ESA PSS-01-729 into an ECSS Standard

  ECSS-Q-70-29B      Never issued

  ECSS-Q-ST-70-29C   Second issue
                     
  15 November 2008   Redrafting ECSS-Q-70-09A according to ECSS drafting rules and new template.
  ------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Table of contents {#table-of-contents .Contents}

[Change log 3](#change-log)

[1 Scope 6](#scope)

[2 Normative references 7](#normative-references)

[3 Terms, definitions and abbreviated terms
8](#terms-definitions-and-abbreviated-terms)

[3.1 Terms defined in other standards
8](#terms-defined-in-other-standards)

[3.2 Terms specific to the present standard
8](#terms-specific-to-the-present-standard)

[3.3 Abbreviated terms 9](#abbreviated-terms)

[3.4 Formula for conversion 9](#formula-for-conversion)

[4 Requirements 10](#requirements)

[4.1 Preparatory conditions 10](#preparatory-conditions)

[4.1.1 Test specimen preparation 10](#test-specimen-preparation)

[4.1.2 Cleaning 12](#cleaning)

[4.1.3 Identification 12](#identification)

[4.2 Test facility 12](#test-facility)

[4.2.1 General requirements 12](#general-requirements)

[4.2.2 Test chamber 12](#test-chamber)

[4.2.3 Sampling equipment 13](#sampling-equipment)

[4.2.4 Analytical equipment 13](#analytical-equipment)

[4.2.5 Gas supplies 14](#gas-supplies)

[4.3 Test chamber certification procedure
14](#test-chamber-certification-procedure)

[4.4 Test procedure 15](#test-procedure)

[4.4.1 Test conditions 15](#test-conditions)

[4.4.2 Test execution 15](#test-execution)

[4.4.3 Analysis of samples 16](#analysis-of-samples)

[4.5 Acceptance limits 16](#acceptance-limits)

[4.5.1 Materials 16](#materials)

[4.5.2 Assembled articles, experiments and racks
16](#assembled-articles-experiments-and-racks)

[4.6 Quality assurance 17](#quality-assurance)

[4.6.1 Data 17](#data)

[4.6.2 Calibration 17](#calibration)

[Annex A (normative) Offgassing evaluation report - DRD
18](#__RefHeading___Toc214447121)

[Annex B (informative) Example of test method procedure
20](#__RefHeading___Toc214447122)

[Bibliography 22](#bibliography)

Tables

[Table 4‑1: Slits setting 14](#__RefHeading___Toc214447124)

\
Scope
=====

All non­metallic materials release trace contaminants into the
surrounding environment; the extent to which this occurs is dependent on
the nature of the material concerned. In the closed environment of a
manned spacecraft contaminants within the atmosphere are potentially
dangerous with respect to toxicity and its consequences for the safety
of the crew.

This Standard defines a test procedure for the determination of the
trace contaminants release by non­metallic materials under a set of
closely controlled conditions. The test procedure covers both individual
materials and assembled articles.

In this Standard the supplier means the testing authority that is
responsible for specifying and executing the offgassing tests.

This Standard describes a test to provide data for aid in the evaluation
of the suitability of assembled articles and materials for use in a
space vehicle crew compartment. The data obtained are in respect of the
nature and quantity of organic and inorganic volatile contaminants
evolved when subjected to the crew compartment environment.

This standard may be tailored for the specific characteristics and
constrains of a space project in conformance with ECSS-S-ST-00.

\
Normative references
====================

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this ECSS Standard. For
dated references, subsequent amendments to, or revision of any of these
publications do not apply, However, parties to agreements based on this
ECSS Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying
the more recent editions of the normative documents indicated below. For
undated references, the latest edition of the publication referred to
applies.

  ----------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  ECSS-S-ST-00-01   ECSS system – Glossary of terms
  ECSS-Q-ST-10-09   Space product assurance – Nonconformance control system
  ECSS-Q-ST-70      Space product assurance – Materials, mechanical parts and processes
  ----------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  \
    Terms, definitions and abbreviated terms
    ========================================

    1.  Terms defined in other standards
        --------------------------------

For the purpose of this Standard, the terms and definitions from
ECSS-S-ST-00-01 and ECSS-Q-ST-70 apply.

Terms specific to the present standard
--------------------------------------

1.  assembled article

any component “black box” or assembly of components which represents the
article to be used in a spacecraft

1.  experiment

item designed and built to accomplish a specific purpose which can be
disassembled and retain its capabilities after re­assembly

1.  offgassing

evolution of gaseous products for an assembled article subjected to
slight radiant heat in the specified test atmosphere

1.  offgassing product

organic or inorganic compound evolved from a material or assembled
article or experiment or rack

1.  rack

structure in which different experiments take place during a manned
mission

1.  SMAC (Spacecraft Maximum Allowable Concentration)

maximum concentration of a volatile offgassed product that is allowed in
the spacecraft atmosphere for a specified flight duration

1.  toxic hazard index (T)

ratio of the projected concentration of each offgassed product to its
SMAC value and summing the ratios for all offgassed products without
separation into toxicological categories

1.  Further details on the calculation of this T-value can also be
    > obtained in NASA-STD-6001.

    1.  Abbreviated terms
        -----------------

For the purpose of this Standard, the abbreviated terms from
ECSS-S-ST-00-01 and the following apply:

  -------------- --------------------------------------------
  Abbreviation   Meaning
  C              concentration expressed in µg/m^3^
  C1             concentration expressed in ppm
  CI^±^          chemical ionization
  EI             electron ionization
  eV             electron volt
  GC             gas­chromatograph
  MS             mass­spectrometer
  MWt            molecular weight
  m/z            ratio mass to charge
  ppm            part per million
  SMAC           Spacecraft Maximum Allowable Concentration
  T              toxic hazard index
  -------------- --------------------------------------------

1.  For µg/m3, the conversion to ppm is done, using the formula ((
    > Terms, definitions and abbreviated terms-1) given in clause 3.4

    1.  Formula for conversion
        ----------------------

Formula ( Terms, definitions and abbreviated terms-1) shows the
conversion from µg/m^3^ to ppm:

  -- ---------------------------------------
     []{#_Ref203373213 .anchor}(Chapter‑1)
  -- ---------------------------------------

Where:

-   *C* is the concentration (µg/m^3^)

-   *C~1~* is the concentration (ppm)

-   *MWt* is the molecular weight (g)

-   *P* is the pressure (hPa)

-   *t* is the room temperature (°C) (End of test)

-   24,47 is the molecular volume at 25 °C (l)

1.  \
    Requirements
    ============

    1.  Preparatory conditions
        ----------------------

        1.  ### Test specimen preparation

            1.  #### General preferences

                a.  The supplier shall classify all materials to be
                    tested into one of the three categories “Surface”,
                    “Volume” and “Mass” described in 4.1.1.2, 4.1.1.3
                    and 4.1.1.4, respectively.

            2.  #### Samples of category “Surface” 

                a.  The category “Surface” shall include films, fabrics,
                    coatings, finishes, inks, primers, adhesives, thin
                    film lubricants, tapes and electrical insulating
                    materials.

<!-- -->

1.  This category is defined for materials that are essentially two
    > dimensional.

    a.  The supplier shall select test samples with a surface of
        (300 ± 10) cm^2^ per litre of test chamber.

    b.  Coatings and finishes shall be coated on a clean aluminium
        substrate.

    c.  Material thickness, curing process and method of application
        shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.

2.  Only the outer surfaces of a material on the aluminium panel are
    > counted in surface area determinations.

    a.  The supplier shall cut films, fabrics and similar materials to
        ensure a surface of (300 ± 10) cm^2^.

3.  Because materials are often “two surfaced” in use, the total surface
    > area is determined by counting, the top and the bottom surface.

    a.  Heat shrinkable tubing or boots shall be applied and shrunk to
        simulate actually used configuration.

    <!-- -->

    1.  #### Samples of category “Volume”

        a.  The category “Volume” shall include foams and other blown or
            foamed materials and insulating padding.

4.  This category is defined for materials having a defined volume but a
    > large real surface area due to surface convolutions or matting.

    a.  The supplier shall cut samples to a thickness of (1,25 ± 0,2) cm
        unless the existing thickness is less than 1,25 cm. In this
        case, the existing thickness shall be used.

    b.  The supplier shall cut the samples to a surface size of (50 ± 5)
        cm^2^ per litre of test container volume.

    c.  []{#_Ref201134867 .anchor}The supplier shall use all surfaces,
        tops, bottoms and sides to calculate the total surface area.

    d.  In cases where the cut pieces of the sample do not fit into the
        container because of its size, the supplier shall cut two or
        more pieces, as long as 1.1.1.1.1k. is met.

    <!-- -->

    1.  #### Samples of category “Mass”

        a.  The category “Mass” shall include potting compounds,
            moulding compounds, cast of formed objects, solid wires and
            thick plastics.

5.  This category is defined for materials having a defined bulk but not
    > falling into the volume classification.

    a.  The supplier shall use the samples as much as possible in the
        supplied configuration and cut them to give (5,0 ± 0,25) g
        sample per litre of chamber volume.

    b.  The supplier shall prepare and cut potted or moulded materials
        to adequate weight.

    <!-- -->

    1.  #### Assembled articles

        a.  The supplier shall test assembled articles in the condition
            in which it was received.

        b.  []{#_Ref185770164 .anchor}The supplier shall perform the
            offgassing test in a passive mode.

6.  Passive mode means that the test is performed without any power
    > supply for the assembled article.

    1.  #### Racks

        a.  The supplier shall test racks in the context of their
            specific requirements, in relation to safety,
            non­degradation of equipments and vacuum resistance.

        b.  []{#_Ref185770731 .anchor}The supplier shall perform the
            offgassing test in a passive mode.

    <!-- -->

    1.  ### Cleaning

        a.  The customer shall perform the same cleaning and treatment
            of the test article as the sample undergoes before
            integration into the spacecraft.

    2.  ### Identification

        a.  The customer shall accompany materials submitted for testing
            by a completed Materials Identification, with technical
            specifications, expected degradation during the test, cure
            and post­cure noted.

        b.  A full description of each assembled article, material
            identification and location shall be provided with each
            article by the customer.

    <!-- -->

    1.  Test facility
        -------------

        1.  ### General requirements

            a.  A basic facility for the performance of the tests shall
                include a sealed test chamber, a sampling capability and
                the analytical equipment.

        2.  ### Test chamber

            a.  The test chamber shall be hermetically sealable.

            b.  The test chamber shall be of a sufficient size so that
                the material or assembled article can be contained.

7.  Best practice is to use the volume of the specimen equivalent to 1/3
    > of the test chamber. If the test chamber is considerably larger
    > than the article under test, this can lead to over dilution of the
    > offgassed products in the test chamber.

    a.  The test chamber shall be constructed out of materials that do
        not offgass beyond the background level.

8.  Refer to the note in 4.3.

    a.  The test chamber shall be accessible for any cleaning operation
        and shall allow full visibility of the sample under test.

    b.  For cleaning purposes, the chamber shall have the capability to
        be evacuated to a pressure of 1,3 Pa or less, or to be purged
        with clean gas not below 80 °C.

    c.  Feed­through connections shall be fitted to the chamber.

9.  This is done so that the temperature at various points on the
    > article or rack may be measured.

    a.  Heatable gas line connections shall be included for sampling of
        the test atmosphere.

    b.  The temperature control system shall be capable of maintaining
        the temperature in the test chamber uniformly within ± 2 °C of
        the designated test temperature.

    c.  The test chamber instrumentation shall have the capability to
        continuously record the temperature.

    d.  The test chamber shall be equipped with an internal fan for the
        convection of the test atmosphere.

    e.  A pressure gauge shall be installed such that the test pressure
        can be measured to an accuracy of ± 1 300 Pa.

    <!-- -->

    1.  ### Sampling equipment

        a.  The sampling equipment shall consist of the following two
            basic types:

            1.  Direct atmosphere sampling using containers of
                accurately known volume for subsequent direct gas
                analysis.

10. For example, chromatograph gas sampling loops and evacuated glass
    > chambers.

    1.  Dynamic atmosphere sampling performed by passing a known volume
        of the test atmosphere through an enrichment device.

<!-- -->

1.  1 For example, a pre­concentration adsorption trap and a cool empty
    > loop.

2.  2 Additional sampling devices can be included such as specific gas
    > monitoring equipment.

    a.  The sampling volume extracted should not exceed 25 % of the
        total volume of the facility.

    <!-- -->

    1.  ### Analytical equipment

        a.  A desorption or extraction device shall be used for the
            recovery and subsequent injection of the pre­concentrated
            contaminants into the analytical instruments specified in
            1.1.1.1.1ll, 1.1.1.1.1mm., and 1.1.1.1.1nn.

        b.  [[]{#_Ref201136317 .anchor}]{#_Ref203365094 .anchor}A gas
            chromatograph with at least one flame ionization detector, a
            temperature programming facility, the necessary data
            recording equipment and a capillary GC column shall be used.

<!-- -->

1.  The capillary GC column is used in order to obtain maximum
    > separation capability.

    a.  [[]{#_Ref201136319 .anchor}]{#_Ref203365123 .anchor}A second gas
        chromatograph equipped with a gas sampling loop, pneumatic
        valves, a methanizer and a flame ionization detector shall be
        used for the determination of carbon monoxide, methane and total
        organics (screening test).

2.  Packed columns are sufficient in this case.

    a.  [[]{#_Ref201136322 .anchor}]{#_Ref203365146 .anchor}A mass
        spectrometer, preferably connected to the gas chromatograph, and
        with the following parameters shall be used for the
        identification of the offgassed products where this cannot be
        done by gas chromatography alone:

        1.  Mass range: 1-700.

        2.  Excitation: 70 eV.

        3.  Mode: EI/CI^±^.

        4.  Resolution (Static): at the slit settings provided, the
            resolution definition (10 % valley) is within the values
            listed in Gas supplies.

        5.  [[]{#_Ref203814180 .anchor}]{#_Ref203815305 .anchor}The
            GC/MS parameters are such that 100 picograms of Methyl
            Stearate injected on to the GC capillary column gives a
            signal to noise ratio of 50:1, for a MS source on the
            molecular ion at m/z 298.

    b.  Calibration devices shall be used.

<!-- -->

1.  1 For example, external standards, such as a complex gas mixture.

2.  2 An infrared spectrometer with a multipath gas cell for use as a
    > complementary system of investigation, in particular with respect
    > to the identification of inorganic contaminants.

    1.  ### Gas supplies

        a.  All carrier gases used shall be of purity not less than
            99,99 %.

<!-- -->

1.  For example Helium or Hydrogen.

[]{#__RefHeading___Toc214447124 .anchor}Table Chapter‑1: Slits setting

  ------------------ ------------ ------------------------------ --------
  Size of the slit   Resolution   Organic reference equivalent
  4^th^ (large)      600          (1 666 ppm)
  3^rd^              2 000        (500 ppm)
  2^nd^              4 000        (250 ppm)
  1^st^ (small)      10 000       (250 ppm)
  ------------------ ------------ ------------------------------ --------

1.  Test chamber certification procedure
    ------------------------------------

    a.  The test chamber certification procedure shall be as follows:

        1.  Heat the chamber prior to testing to at least 70 °C for a
            period of 24 hours, either under a clean vacuum of
            &lt; 1,3 Pa or with a continuous purge of clean dry nitrogen
            or helium gas.

        2.  Reduce the chamber temperature to the test temperature and
            fill the chamber with the specified test atmosphere to the
            test pressure and condition it for 72 hours.

        3.  Analyse the chamber atmosphere for residual contamination.

        4.  Certify the chamber as clean for use if the background level
            is sufficiently low to permit detection and quantification
            of offgassed products from the test specimen.

<!-- -->

1.  Best practice is to have a background level less than 20 ppm or 59
    > mg/l, in Pentane equivalent.

    1.  Test procedure
        --------------

        1.  ### Test conditions

            a.  The test conditions shall be as follows:

                1.  Temperature: 50 °C ± 2 °C.

                2.  Atmosphere: at least 20,9 % oxygen, with the balance
                    nitrogen or argon.

                3.  Pressure: 1 atmosphere pressure (1 013 hPa at 50
                    °C).

                4.  Duration: 72 hours ± 1 hour.

        2.  ### Test execution

            a.  The test procedure for both materials and assembled
                articles shall be as follows:

                1.  Place the clean, weighed test item into the test
                    chamber and ensure, for assembled articles,
                    experiments or racks, that all electrical
                    connections are made.

                2.  Place the various temperature sensors on the spots
                    to be monitored and close the chamber.

                3.  Expose the experiment to a vacuum of less than
                    100 hPa and less than 3 minutes.

                4.  In case the experiment is not resistant to vacuum,
                    connect the chamber to the pressurisation system and
                    purge it with the test atmosphere (through a
                    molecular sieve trap) with a minimum volume of three
                    times the chamber capacity.

                5.  After completion of the purge, adjust the test
                    atmosphere to the test pressure.

2.  940 hPa at room temperature provides a pressure close to 1
    > atmosphere at 50 °C.

    1.  At the end of the defined duration, allow the chamber to cool
        down to room temperature by passive cooling.

    2.  Connect the sampling equipment to the chamber and take samples
        of the atmosphere within 12 hours after room temperature has
        been reached.

    3.  Open the chamber and note any relevant information.

3.  For example, particular odour remaining in the chamber and
    > condensation.

    1.  ### Analysis of samples

        1.  #### Materials screening test

            a.  A material screening test shall be applied only to
                individual materials.

            b.  The sample analysis shall identify the following:

                1.  Quantity of carbon monoxide offgassed in µg/g of
                    material tested.

                2.  Quantity of total organic (expressed as pentane
                    equivalents) offgassed in µg/g of material tested.

                3.  Identity and quantity of each contaminant offgassed
                    in an amount in excess of 10 µg/g of material
                    tested.

        2.  #### General test for materials and assembled articles

            a.  In specific cases for materials tested, and in general
                for assembled articles and racks, the sample analysis
                shall identify and quantify all contaminants present.

    <!-- -->

    1.  Acceptance limits
        -----------------

        1.  ### Materials

            a.  For materials the following acceptance limits shall
                apply:

                1.  Carbon Monoxide: 25 µg/g of material tested.

                2.  Total Organics: 100 µg/g of material tested.

            b.  In cases where materials are added to an assembled
                article which has already been subjected to test, the
                material shall be tested and shall meet the same
                acceptance limits as the assembled article.

4.  For example, materials can be added as a result of repair or rework.

    1.  ### Assembled articles, experiments and racks

        a.  The quantity of each individual offgassed product shall
            result in a predicted spacecraft concentration less than the
            SMAC value for that product.

5.  When this condition is not met, consider the rejection and retest of
    > the article concerned.

    a.  The toxic hazard index T shall be determined by calculating the
        ratio of the projected concentration of each offgassed product
        to its SMAC value and summing the ratios for all offgassed
        products without separation into toxicological categories.

    b.  The T value shall not exceed 0,5.

    c.  Amount of each contaminant shall be expressed in µg/m^3^ of the
        manned space vehicle crew compartment.

    d.  The supplier shall assess the possible toxic hazards.

6.  Those toxic hazards due to the volatile contamination evolved from
    > the assembled article under investigation and for impacts on the
    > potential toxicity of the total quantity of offgassed products
    > from all contaminant generating items for a given mission.

    1.  Quality assurance
        -----------------

        1.  ### Data

            a.  The supplier shall retain the quality records for at
                least ten years, or in accordance with project business
                agreement requirements.

7.  For example, the logbooks.

    a.  []{#_Ref185763890 .anchor}The supplier shall provide the
        offgassing evaluation report in conformance with Annex A – DRD
        for customer approval.

    <!-- -->

    1.  ### Calibration

        a.  The supplier shall calibrate any measuring equipment to
            traceable reference standards.

        b.  The supplier shall record any suspected or actual equipment
            failure as a project nonconformance report according to
            ECSS-Q-ST-10-09.

8.  This is to ensure that previous results are examined to ascertain
    > whether or not re­inspection and retesting is necessary.

<!-- -->

A.  []{#_Ref200521707 .anchor} []{#__RefHeading___Toc214447121
    .anchor}(normative)\
    Offgassing evaluation report - DRD

    1.  DRD identification

        1.  []{#_Ref163281889 .anchor}Requirement identification and
            > source document

This DRD is called from ECSS-Q-ST-70-29, requirement eee.

1.  []{#_Ref163281891 .anchor}Purpose and objective

The purpose of the document is to describe the contents of the
offgassing evaluation report.

1.  Expected response

    1.  []{#_Ref163281893 .anchor}Scope and content

        1.  Materials, assembled articles and racks designation

        <!-- -->

        a.  The report shall contain the following information for the
            material:

            1.  ID

            2.  Type of product

            3.  Chemical nature

            4.  Manufacturer

            5.  Procurements

            6.  Standards specifications

            7.  Summary of processing parameters.

        b.  The report shall contain the following information for the
            assembled articles and racks:

            1.  Designation of the item

            2.  List of contents

            3.  Manufacturer

            4.  Reference and serial number

            5.  Application

            6.  Location.

        c.  The report shall contain the description of the samples.

        <!-- -->

        1.  Test equipment

        <!-- -->

        a.  The report shall contain the volume of the test chamber.

        <!-- -->

        1.  Test procedure

        <!-- -->

        a.  The report shall contain the following information:

            1.  Test temperature duration

            2.  Test atmosphere (normal air, enriched oxygen
                concentration, nitrogen)

            3.  Test pressure at room temperature.

        <!-- -->

        1.  Test result

        <!-- -->

        a.  The report shall contain the following information:

            1.  Result of analysis

            2.  Projected spacecraft volume.

        b.  The report shall contain any observation during and after
            the test on material, assembled article or rack.

<!-- -->

1.  Results are expressed in µg/g or µg/cm^2^.

    1.  Special remarks

None.

A.  []{#_Ref163286842 .anchor} []{#__RefHeading___Toc214447122
    .anchor}(informative)\
    Example of test method procedure

    1.  Introduction

The data given in B.2 to B.4 is for information purposes and reflects
possible experimental system surroundings that can be found in any
laboratory. It is included here for the purpose of guidance and serves
as an example assembly.

1.  []{#_Ref213148992 .anchor}Test chamber

<!-- -->

a.  HERAEUS model VHT 85/110:

    1.  Volume of test chamber: 718 l.

    2.  Temperature rise: From 22 °C (room temperature) to 50 °C in
        20 minutes.

    3.  Set the fan to ”on”.

    4.  Expose the experiment for 72 hours at 50 °C, and then stop the
        heater.

    5.  Recovering time to reach room temperature and 940 hPa: 12 hours.

    6.  Clean and dry synthetic air or pure nitrogen is used.

    <!-- -->

    1.  Sampling

        1.  Gas

5 litre glass bottle.

1.  Ceramic Traps

<!-- -->

a.  Ceramic trap model 1-010 R filled with Carbopack B^^ from SUPELCO:

    1.  60 mesh - 80 mesh: equivalent to 100 m^2^;

    2.  Pneumatic pumping system, flow rate: 24,33 ml/min;

    3.  Gas volume passing through the trap: 243,3 ml.

        1.  Direct sample

This analysis is performed to establish the real value of carbon
monoxide (CO) and methane (CH~4~) produced by the experiment. The
analytical equipment is a Gas Chromatograph equipped with a Methanizer
and a Flame Ionization Detector (FID). The two columns are packed with
Molecular Sieve and Porapak N^^. A backflush is used during the first
period of the elution.

1.  Preconcentrated sample

The ceramic trap 1-01-R filled with 243,3 ml of contaminated air is
desorbed by using a microwaves desorption system, model MW-1A from
REKTORIK (CH).

-   Desorption time: 30 seconds

-   Energy: 1 425 Ah 10^-6^

    1.  []{#_Ref213149002 .anchor}Analytical equipment

a.  A Gas Chromatograph equipped with a DB1701^^ column from J.W

    1.  Dimensions: 60 m × 0,320 mm

    2.  Film thickness: 0,25 µm

b.  Temperature programme

    1.  20 minutes at ‑20 °C, then 1 °C/min to 150 °C

    2.  150 °C during 15 minutes then 2 °C/min to 200 °C

c.  Detector

    1.  Flame Ionization Detector (FID) at 180 °C

    2.  Thermal Conductivity Detector (TCD) at 180 °C

d.  Gas Carrier

    1.  Helium: 99,999 %

    2.  Flow rate: 2 ml/min

e.  A Mass Spectrometer, model Profile^^, from KRATOS (UK)

    1.  Magnet system

    2.  Mass range: 1-500

    3.  Excitation (Electron beam): 70 eV

    4.  Mode: EI

    5.  Scan rate: 0,6 seconds per decade

    6.  Resolution: 600

f.  A SUN^^ computer, using the MACH3^^ software, able to store
    simultaneously the MS and the GC signals (FID, TCD).

g.  The quantification is done by the GC signal, the identification by
    the MS signal, compared with 80 000 spectra in memory.

 Bibliography

  --------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ECSS-S-ST-00    ECSS system – Description, implementation and general requirements
  NASA-STD-6001   Flammability, Odor, Off­gassing and Compatibility Requirements & Test Procedures for Materials in Environments That Support Combustion
  --------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
