-   [Change log](#change-log)
-   [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
-   [Introduction](#introduction)
    -   [\
        Scope](#scope)
        -   [General](#general)
        -   [Applicability](#applicability)
    -   [\
        Normative References](#normative-references)
    -   [\
        Terms, definitions and abbreviated
        terms](#terms-definitions-and-abbreviated-terms)
        -   [Terms and definitions from other
            documents](#terms-and-definitions-from-other-documents)
        -   [Terms specific to the present
            document](#terms-specific-to-the-present-document)
        -   [Abbreviated terms](#abbreviated-terms)
    -   [\
        ECSS objectives](#ecss-objectives)
    -   [\
        ECSS policies](#ecss-policies)
        -   [General](#general-1)
        -   [Policy for establishing ECSS
            System](#policy-for-establishing-ecss-system)
            -   [General](#general-2)
            -   [Policy for establishing ECSS
                documents](#policy-for-establishing-ecss-documents)
            -   [Policy for cooperation with other
                SDOs](#policy-for-cooperation-with-other-sdos)
        -   [Policy for application of the ECSS
            System](#policy-for-application-of-the-ecss-system)
        -   [Policy for maintenance and configuration management of the
            ECSS
            System](#policy-for-maintenance-and-configuration-management-of-the-ecss-system)
        -   [Policy for certification and
            training](#policy-for-certification-and-training)
            -   [Certification](#certification)
            -   [Training and users
                information](#training-and-users-information)
        -   [Policy for promoting the ECSS
            system](#policy-for-promoting-the-ecss-system)
        -   [Policy for translation of ECSS documents by ECSS
            members](#policy-for-translation-of-ecss-documents-by-ecss-members)
        -   [Policy for use of ECSS System by non-ECSS
            members](#policy-for-use-of-ecss-system-by-non-ecss-members)
    -   [\
        ECSS organization](#ecss-organization)
        -   [Participation](#participation)
            -   [General](#general-3)
            -   [Full members](#full-members)
            -   [Associates](#associates)
            -   [Observers](#observers)
            -   [Accession by new participating
                organizations](#accession-by-new-participating-organizations)
            -   [Termination of
                participation](#termination-of-participation)
            -   [Change of status](#change-of-status)
        -   [ECSS Developer Structure](#ecss-developer-structure)
            -   [Overview](#overview)
            -   [Mission statements of the ECSS
                bodies](#mission-statements-of-the-ecss-bodies)
        -   [ECSS decision making
            process](#ecss-decision-making-process)
    -   [\
        ECSS Documentation](#ecss-documentation)
        -   [Overview](#overview-1)
        -   [Documentation for
            developers](#documentation-for-developers)
        -   [Documentation for users (ECSS
            System)](#documentation-for-users-ecss-system)
-   [Bibliography](#bibliography)

![ecss-logo-capture10July2008](/home/sdias/Desktop/papper_docs/ecss/1-Active_ECSS/generated/ECSS-P-00C(22March2013).docx1//media/image1.jpeg){width="4.698611111111111in"
height="2.8305555555555557in"}

ECSS

Standardization objectives, policies and organization

**Foreword**

This document (ECSS-P-00C) presents the objectives, policy and
organization of ECSS together with its architecture and documents.

This Standard has been prepared by the ECSS Technical Authority and
approved by the ECSS Steering Board.

Published by: ESA Requirements and Standards Division

ESTEC, P.O. Box 299,

2200 AG Noordwijk

The Netherlands

Copyright: 2013© by the European Space Agency for the members of ECSS

 Change log

  --------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ECSS-P-00A      First issue
                  
  4 April 2000    

  ECSS-P-00B      Never published

  ECSS-P-00C      Second issue
                  
  22 March 2013   -   ECSS objectives and policies updated, in particular the following was added:
                  
                      -   Concepts of Handbook, Technical Memorandum and Adoption Notice
                  
                      -   Policy for establishing ECSS documents
                  
                      -   Policy for certification, training and promotion
                  
                      -   Policy for cooperation with other SDOs
                  
                      -   Policy for application of the ECSS system
                  
                      -   Policy for the maintenance of the ECSS system
                  
                      -   Policy for the translation and use of the ECSS System by non-ECSS members
                  
                  -   Roles of the different types of ECSS participants and process for accessing and changing status clarified
                  
                  -   ECSS Structure updated to reflect actual structure
                  
                  -   ECSS decision making process defined
                  
                  -   ECSS documentation structure clarified, including addition of the new branch “Space sustainability” to the ECSS system
                  
  --------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Table of contents {#table-of-contents .Contents}

[Change log 3](#change-log)

[Introduction 6](#introduction)

[1 Scope 7](#scope)

[1.1 General 7](#general)

[1.2 Applicability 7](#applicability)

[2 Normative References 7](#normative-references)

[3 Terms, definitions and abbreviated terms
8](#terms-definitions-and-abbreviated-terms)

[3.1 Terms and definitions from other documents
8](#terms-and-definitions-from-other-documents)

[3.2 Terms specific to the present document
8](#terms-specific-to-the-present-document)

[3.3 Abbreviated terms 9](#abbreviated-terms)

[4 ECSS objectives 10](#ecss-objectives)

[5 ECSS policies 11](#ecss-policies)

[5.1 General 11](#general-1)

[5.2 Policy for establishing ECSS System
12](#policy-for-establishing-ecss-system)

[5.2.1 General 12](#general-2)

[5.2.2 Policy for establishing ECSS documents
12](#policy-for-establishing-ecss-documents)

[5.2.3 Policy for cooperation with other SDOs
13](#policy-for-cooperation-with-other-sdos)

[5.3 Policy for application of the ECSS System
14](#policy-for-application-of-the-ecss-system)

[5.4 Policy for maintenance and configuration management of the ECSS
System
14](#policy-for-maintenance-and-configuration-management-of-the-ecss-system)

[5.5 Policy for certification and training
15](#policy-for-certification-and-training)

[5.6 Policy for promoting the ECSS system
15](#policy-for-promoting-the-ecss-system)

[5.7 Policy for translation of ECSS documents by ECSS members
15](#policy-for-translation-of-ecss-documents-by-ecss-members)

[5.8 Policy for use of ECSS System by non-ECSS members
16](#policy-for-use-of-ecss-system-by-non-ecss-members)

[6 ECSS organization 17](#ecss-organization)

[6.1 Participation 17](#participation)

[6.1.1 General 17](#general-3)

[6.1.2 Full members 17](#full-members)

[6.1.3 Associates 17](#associates)

[6.1.4 Observers 18](#observers)

[6.1.5 Accession by new participating organizations
18](#accession-by-new-participating-organizations)

[6.1.6 Termination of participation 18](#termination-of-participation)

[6.1.7 Change of status 19](#change-of-status)

[6.2 ECSS Developer Structure 19](#ecss-developer-structure)

[6.2.1 Overview 19](#overview)

[6.2.2 Mission statements of the ECSS bodies
20](#mission-statements-of-the-ecss-bodies)

[6.3 ECSS decision making process 21](#ecss-decision-making-process)

[7 ECSS Documentation 23](#ecss-documentation)

[7.1 Overview 23](#overview-1)

[7.2 Documentation for developers 23](#documentation-for-developers)

[7.3 Documentation for users (ECSS System)
24](#documentation-for-users-ecss-system)

[Bibliography 26](#bibliography)

**Figures**

[Figure 6‑1: ECSS developer structure 20](#_Toc351715556)

[Figure 7‑1: Architecture of ECSS documentation for developers
23](#_Toc351715557)

[Figure 7‑2: General Architecture of ECSS documentation for users
25](#_Toc351715558)

 Introduction

Standardization is an important tool to reduce risks, cost and improve
both quality and communication between parties during the preparation
and execution of programmes. European Space Agencies and industry have
in the past individually developed standards and applied them to their
projects. The European Cooperation for Space Standardization ECSS) was
initiated to harmonize the requirements from existing Standards for
space projects, and to provide a single, coherent set of standards for
use in all European space systems development and operation.

The goal of the ECSS Standardization System is to develop a common set
of consistent standards for hardware, software, information and
activities to be applied in space projects, so that life cycle cost are
minimized, while continually improving the quality, functional
integrity, reliability and compatibility of all elements of the project.

\
Scope
=====

General
-------

This document states the objectives, policies and organisational
structure for establishing, implementing, and maintaining a coherent set
of standards for space systems development and operation, created
through the European Cooperation for Space Standardization.

ECSS documents are prepared for space projects and applications
addressing aspects of:

-   Project management,

-   Engineering

-   Product Assurance, and

-   Space sustainability

1.  For space sustainability definition, see 3.2.3.

ECSS documents include standards and supporting documents (handbooks,
technical memoranda, general support documents such as glossary),
together referred to as the ECSS system.

Applicability
-------------

This document, being the top level ECSS document, applies to all ECSS
activities and products.

\
Normative References
====================

None.

\
Terms, definitions and abbreviated terms
========================================

Terms and definitions from other documents
------------------------------------------

Standardized definition of terms for the ECSS Standards are defined in
ECSS‑S‑ST‑00‑01 “ECSS system - Glossary of terms”.

For example, the following terms, defined in ECSS-S-ST-00-01, apply to
this document:

-   Standard

-   Handbook, and

-   Technical memorandum

Terms specific to the present document
--------------------------------------

1.  [European Cooperation on Space Standardization
    (ECSS)](http://www.ecss.nl/)

co-operative arrangement comprising nominated representatives of
European space agencies and industries set up to achieve the objective
of developing a comprehensive and coherent set of space standards for
direct use in the implementation of space programmes/projects and the
development of space products

1.  ECSS developer

organisational structure of ECSS set up to develop and maintain the ECSS
system

1.  []{#_Ref349815200 .anchor}ECSS system

set of standards, handbooks and technical memoranda for ECSS users,
organised in the following branches, for direct use in the
implementation of space programmes and projects:

-   Space project management

-   Space product assurance

-   Space engineering

-   Space sustainability, which encompasses all standards and handbooks
    for the development of space products, contributing to the long term
    sustainability of space activities, including orbital debris
    mitigation, space situation awareness, and planetary protection.

Space sustainability refers to the ability for all countries to continue
to use space for peaceful purpose and socio-economic or scientific
benefit over the long term.

1.  ECSS developer documents

set of internal ECSS documents defining the organisational structures,
roles and responsibilities, processes and rules required to define and
implement the ECSS policy and to develop, publish and maintain the
documents that make up the ECSS system

1.  standards development organization (SDO)

organisation establishing and/or publishing standards (national,
regional, international, sectorial …) which are also available to users
outside the standards[]{#_Toc191723615 .anchor} developing organisation
itself

Abbreviated terms
-----------------

The following abbreviated terms are used in this document:

  Abbreviation   Meaning
  -------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
  CEN            European Committee for Standardization
  CENELEC        European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization
  ECSS           European Cooperation for Space Standardization
  EN             European standard
  ES             Executive Secretariat
  ETSI           European Telecommunications Standards Institute
  HB             Handbook
  ISO            International Organization for Standardization
  SB             Steering Board
  SDO            standards development organization
  ST             Standard
  TA             Technical Authority
  TM             Technical Memorandum
  WG             Working group

\
ECSS objectives
===============

European Cooperation for Space Standardization (ECSS) goal is to provide
a set of documents, which have the overall objectives to:

-   be recognized and accepted by the European space community for use
    in space programmes/projects;

-   achieve more cost effective space programmes and projects in Europe
    in terms of technical performance, life cycle cost-effectiveness and
    on-time deliveries;

-   improve the competitiveness of European space sector;

-   improve the quality and safety of space projects and products;

-   reduce risk and guarantee interoperability and interface
    compatibility by applying proved and recognized requirements and
    methods;

-   facilitate clear and unambiguous communication between all parties
    involved in space systems development and operation, in a form
    suitable for inclusion in legally binding documents;

-   reflect user needs and feedback of experience from programmes,
    projects and other appropriate sources to improve ECSS Standards,
    while preserving internal coherency of ECSS system;

-   account for new practices, products, technology and missions.

\
ECSS policies
=============

General
-------

In order to meet the objectives stated in clause 4, the ECSS policy is
to:

-   produce an integrated and coherent set of management, engineering,
    product assurance and space sustainability standards

<!-- -->

-   covering all activities, phases and levels for the development and
    operation of a space system, and

-   based on consensus amongst the ECSS members;

<!-- -->

-   ensure that these standards are structured in such a way that they:

<!-- -->

-   are directly applicable in business agreements;

-   take into account continual improvement of methods, techniques and
    technologies;

-   define requirements in such a way that they bear on the need to be
    fulfilled rather than on the means to be used to fulfil that
    particular need, whenever possible;

-   are based on proven and validated approaches, methods and solutions;

-   avoid duplication with other standards by incorporating into the
    ECSS system where appropriate, available documents from other
    sources;

-   take into account all valid sources of information, expertise and
    feedback in the preparation and maintenance of ECSS documents;

-   make the best use of all available research, including the
    technology programmes of European space agencies and industry;

-   take into account in the course of their development, the potential
    negative impact of space systems, during their complete life cycle,
    on human life, the environment, public and private property, space
    and ground investments;

<!-- -->

-   evaluate the benefits resulting from the use of a standard prior to
    its initiation;

-   promote the wider usage of ECSS standards. Therefore, ECSS published
    documents are made freely available worldwide.

ECSS does not provide any warranty nor accept any liability with respect
to the use of its documents.

Policy for establishing ECSS System
-----------------------------------

### General

The core of the ECSS System is the complete set of ECSS standards.

Standards can be developed entirely within ECSS or in cooperation with
other SDOs.

ECSS standards can be supported/complemented by HBs and TMs.

### Policy for establishing ECSS documents

#### Policy for establishing ECSS standards

ECSS policy is to ensure that ECSS Standards:

-   respond to a need clearly expressed by the space community, taking
    full account of the state of the art;

-   are designed for ease of application by their users and in
    particular, they shall be as complete as necessary, concise,
    consistent, accurate and unambiguous;

-   are comprehensible to qualified persons who have not participated in
    their preparation and be structured in a way that facilitates
    essential tailoring for application to specific projects;

-   contain requirements which benefit the whole space community, which
    are specific, achievable, relevant, uniquely identified and
    verifiable, and which do not give exclusive advantage to any
    individual European organisation;

-   are not to be considered as stand-alone documents but rather as part
    of a complete set of normative and reference documents;

-   avoid duplication of requirements inside and amongst documents;

-   are developed taking into account contributions from all relevant
    sources;

-   are subjected to public review open to all interested parties,
    before they can be approved;

-   are structured in such a way that they:

<!-- -->

-   can directly support the formal customer-supplier interfaces and
    relationships, and address all the levels of the customer-supplier
    chain;

-   can be tailored to the technical, cost, schedule, programmatic and
    economic characteristics of individual space programmes and
    projects;

-   address all phases and activities from start to finish of a project;

<!-- -->

-   are drafted, approved and published in English.

In order to ensure uniformity of structure, style and terminology within
the full ECSS system, ECSS has established and applies processes and
drafting rules (see ECSS-D-00). In addition, in establishing the ECSS
glossary, internationally agreed terms and definitions are used, where
appropriate.

#### Policy for establishing ECSS handbooks

ECSS policy is to ensure that ECSS Handbooks:

-   are developed when need exists to support the application of ECSS
    standard(s);

-   describe solution that comply with existing ECSS requirement(s).

#### Policy for using documents developed by other SDOs

When an already approved and published non-ECSS document (e.g. ISO IS,
EN) exists, and is considered useable to fulfil an ECSS objective, this
document is either:

-   copied in whole or in part, with permission, in an ECSS document;

-   in case of standard, directly called up as normative reference, by
    ECSS standard(s) and therefore made applicable by the ECSS system;

-   adopted through an adoption notice in the case where modification,
    addition, and/or deletion of part of the adopted document is
    necessary to ensure proper integration of that non-ECSS standard in
    the ECSS system. Non-ECSS documents can be adopted as standards or
    handbooks.

> The adoption notices follow the same approval process as ECSS
> standards.

### Policy for cooperation with other SDOs

The ECSS policy is to establish co-operation with other SDOs consistent
with ECSS objectives, in order to:

-   achieve international consensus and recognition where essential to
    allow global interoperability, mission success, safety, protection
    of the earth, space and their environments, or common policies or
    treaties;

-   influence, as early as possible, documents from other SDOs, which
    could impact ECSS or which are intended to be adopted by ECSS;

-   maximize cost effectiveness and technical validity for ECSS by
    incorporating output or expertise from other SDO.

Co-operation between ECSS and other SDOs may fall into one of three
categories, as follows:

-   formal cooperation: cooperation with another organisation conducted
    under the control of a formal agreement, approved by both parties;

-   ad-hoc cooperation: activities to interface or cooperate with
    another SDO or organisation, as a result of a specific SB decision
    and associated mandate;

-   liaison: relation with another organisation, typically SDOs, to
    provide mutual visibility of the activities of ECSS and another
    organisation. In the frame of liaison level agreements collaborative
    activities are not necessarily conducted.

Policy for application of the ECSS System
-----------------------------------------

ECSS documents are made applicable to a project only through a legal
document such as business agreement (e.g. contract) and/or internal
directives. When made applicable:

-   it is the responsibility of the party imposing a particular standard
    to tailor it to ensure that it meets the intended need.

-   all parties using a standard are advised to acquaint themselves with
    the intended scope and applicability of the standard to prevent
    inappropriate usage.

-   the party imposing the use of an ECSS document, or a part thereof,
    is responsible for monitoring and assuring its correct application.

-   all users of ECSS documents are encouraged to inform the ECSS
    Secretariat about experience gained from application of ECSS
    Standards, so that inadequacies in the documents can be corrected
    and improvements made.

Details concerning application of the ECSS system are provided in
ECSS-S-ST-00.

Policy for maintenance and configuration management of the ECSS System
----------------------------------------------------------------------

ECSS implements a maintenance policy which includes:

-   a fully documented and recorded baseline for the ECSS system and its
    individual documents.

-   A change system based on the use of traceable change requests,
    change request dispositions and their implementation.

-   a 5 year maintenance cycle at the end of which all standards of the
    ECSS system shall be re-assessed with respect to the need for
    updating and reissuing them with a common incremented issue index.
    During that period, only modifications (technical or editorial)
    which are strictly needed to guarantee correct application of the
    standard or to adapt to new factors shall be implemented.

-   a process to collect feedback and lessons learned from users and
    developers as a prime source for maintenance of the ECSS system.

-   a systematic checking of compatibility of modifications introduced
    in new revisions or issues of documents with already published
    requirements to maintain internal coherency of the ECSS system.

-   a configuration management system for ECSS documentation in line
    with the following principles:

<!-- -->

-   Establish and maintain a Configuration Management index containing
    current issue and revision status of all ECSS documents and make
    this available to all interested parties.

-   apply the configuration management procedure, as defined in
    ECSS-D-00.

<!-- -->

-   Nomination of Document and Discipline Focal Points to support the
    Technical Authority for correct understanding and application of the
    standards and assessment of feedback and Change Requests.

Policy for certification and training
-------------------------------------

#### Certification

ECSS neither provides nor recognizes any certification process of
supplier or of product according to ECSS requirements, by any party.

#### Training and users information

ECSS promotes usage of ECSS system in European space projects and beyond
through information and, as far as practical, through training of
potential users. In addition, ECSS does not endorse the development of
third party training courses related to ECSS system.

Policy for promoting the ECSS system
------------------------------------

ECSS will promote worldwide usage of ECSS system through all appropriate
means: e.g. conference papers, organization of users’ day, dedicated
presentations to space related projects or organizations, liaisons with
standards development organizations.

In particular, ECSS has developed and maintains a user friendly website
enabling both ECSS standards developers and users to get fully
up-to-date information.

Policy for translation of ECSS documents by ECSS members
--------------------------------------------------------

ECSS documents are written and published in English language only. Any
ECSS member wishing to translate, at its own expense, an ECSS document
into another language may do so, provided that such intent is made known
to the ECSS Secretariat and this ECSS member remains the sole
responsible for the coherence between the English version and the
translated one. Such translated documents are not part of the ECSS
system. They shall bear a different identification number than the
original ECSS document and shall separately identify which ECSS Standard
has been used. In no way shall approval of the ECSS Steering Board, nor
any duty of distribution by the ECSS Secretariat, be stated or implied
for such translations, nor may such documents be sold.

ECSS does not recognize nor maintain translated version of the ECSS
original documents in English.

Policy for use of ECSS System by non-ECSS members
-------------------------------------------------

The European Space Agency, on behalf of the participating members, holds
copyright for all ECSS documents. No ECSS document may be reproduced in
any form without the explicit consent of ESA. However, this consent is
granted to ECSS members for their own use, for their contractors and
subcontractors.

In case of request by non-ESA members or non-ECSS members for using ECSS
documents in whole or in part in their own documentation, the following
policy shall be applied:

-   direct use of ECSS standards themselves should be made rather than
    rewriting using quotation of ECSS standards. This could avoid
    incoherencies with ECSS system due to partial imports of ECSS
    requirements, modified quotations or quotation of obsolete versions.

-   ECSS members are informed of requests addressed to the ES. Final
    version of the proposed agreement to grant use and/or translation
    should be submitted to SB approval and, when approved, signed by the
    SB chairman on behalf of ECSS members (Copyright on ECSS standards
    being held by ESA on behalf of ECSS members, final agreement are
    also to be signed by ESA appropriate official).

-   when ECSS documents text is used, ECSS copyright is acknowledged,
    quotations clearly identified in the document together with exact
    reference/version and potential modifications of ECSS standards used
    as source. This applies also to any derived document.

-   when translation of ECSS standard(s) is performed by the
    beneficiary, this translation should be made available to ECSS
    members.

\
ECSS organization
=================

Participation
-------------

### General

ECSS is open to participation from all European space sector and
associated organizations. Participating entities in ECSS can have a role
of Members, Associates or Observers.

Agreement to work in the interest of ECSS, to pursue the ECSS objectives
and policies and to follow rules as set out in the ECSS Operating
Documents (ECSS-P-00 and ECSS-D-00) is required from all participating
organizations.

### Full members

ECSS Full members are European space sector stakeholders that indicate
their intention to actively participate in ECSS document production,
maintenance, use and the associated feedback. They commit to:

-   provide an adequate level of support for all these activities,

-   ensure the implementation of ECSS system in their respective
    projects when applicable.

Any member from the European space industry will participate through
Eurospace.

Only Full members take part in the consensus process within ECSS, as
specified in 6.3a.

At the time of the approval of this issue of ECSS-P-00, the following
organisations were Full members: Agenzia Spaziale Italiana, Centre
National d’Etudes Spatiales, Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt
e.V., European Space Agency, Eurospace, Netherlands Space Office,
Norwegian Space Centre, UK Space Agency.

### Associates

ECSS Associates are those European space sector stakeholders that
indicate a desire to participate in ECSS document production but at a
reduced level of effort or limited to some specific aspects/disciplines,
and that commit to implement ECSS system in their respective projects
when applicable for those documents whose preparation they were involved
in.

Associates are encouraged to provide feedback on their use of the ECSS
standards by CR’s or other means.

Associates will be given access to specific ECSS body as per ECSS
Technical Authority proposal and when approval is given by the ECSS
Steering Board.

At the time of the approval of this issue of ECSS-P-00, the following
organisations were Associates: Canadian Space Agency.

### Observers

Observers are those European space sector stakeholders desiring a formal
tie with the ECSS through which they can observe the development process
of technical documentation and through which they can contribute to the
ECSS system (e.g. need for new standards, return of experience related
to ECSS system application in projects).

Their participation to the production, review of documents is not
envisaged but not excluded.

Observers will be given access to specific ECSS body as per ECSS
Technical Authority proposal and when approval is given by the ECSS
Steering Board.

At the time of the approval of this issue of ECSS-P-00, the following
organisations were observers: EUMETSAT, European Defence Agency,
CEN/CENELEC.

### Accession by new participating organizations

Request for participation or change of status shall be sent in writing
to the ECSS Secretariat, stating the formal acceptance of the conditions
laid out in the relevant clauses 6.1.1 to 6.1.4. The Steering Board
decides on such requests by consensus of its members. Accession or
change of status takes place on the date of notification by the ECSS
Secretariat that the Steering Board has approved their participation.

### Termination of participation

A participating organization may terminate its participation in ECSS by
written notification to ECSS Secretariat, who informs the ECSS Steering
Board. The termination becomes effective three months after receipt of
the notification in the ECSS Secretariat. Such participating
organization shall endeavour to minimize the effects of the termination
on ECSS.

If, in the opinion of two thirds of all members, a participant no longer
complies with relevant clauses 6.1.1 to 6.1.4, its participation is
terminated with immediate effect.

### Change of status

A participating organization may change its status according to the
following rules:

a.  For changing status from Observer to either Associate or Full Member
    or from Associate to Full Member, the principles laid down in 6.1.5
    shall be followed.

b.  For changing status from Full Member to either Associate or Observer
    or from Associate to Observer, the principles laid down in 6.1.6
    shall be followed.

ECSS Developer Structure
------------------------

### Overview

The ECSS activities are organized through a number of bodies,
collectively known as the ECSS Developer, whose main functions are as
follows:

-   **Steering Board (SB):** Define ECSS objectives, policy and strategy
    and endorse the work plan

-   **Technical Authority (TA):** Implement the objectives, policy and
    strategy defined by the SB; setup, approve, implement and monitor
    the Work-plan endorsed by the SB

-   **Executive Secretariat (ES**): Support the TA and WGs, enforces
    drafting rules, provide administrative support to the TA and SB, and
    ensure promotion of ECSS and interface with other SDOs.

-   **Working Group (WG):** Convened as necessary by TA and in charge of
    producing/modifying the standards as required by the endorsed
    Work-plan.

-   **Network of Expert (NoE):** Document and Discipline Focal Points
    that, with the addition of ad hoc experts, support TA and ES in
    specific tasks.

Figure 6‑1 presents the ECSS developer structure.

In addition to the above and in line with the bodies responsibilities,
task forces may be created by the SB or TA, to assist in executing their
responsibilities, and are normally used to investigate and make
recommendations on a particular aspect or issue related to ECSS
activities. Their mandate is usually of limited duration.

The organisation of ECSS bodies, together with ECSS developer
responsibilities, documentation and processes is addressed in ECSS-D-00.

[[]{#_Toc351715556 .anchor}]{#_Ref351714156 .anchor}Figure 6‑1: ECSS
developer structure

### Mission statements of the ECSS bodies

#### Steering Board (SB)

The SB is mandated by the participating member organizations to define
the objectives, policy and strategy for the ECSS system and for
providing overall leadership of the ECSS bodies.

The SB decides whether ECSS shall cooperate with other SDOs, which type
of cooperation, and endorses the cooperation agreement prepared by the
TA.

#### Technical Authority (TA)

The activity of the TA is guided and monitored by the SB.

The TA is the technical approval authority for the initiation and
release of new ECSS documents as well as for all changes to existing
ECSS documents.

It is in charge to setup and implement the Work-plan with the support of
the ES. Furthermore, TA proposes the Work-plan to SB for endorsement.

Following interest expressed by any ECSS partner or other SDO for a
co-operative agreement, the TA:

-   assesses the impact of formal cooperation, and submit recommendation
    to the SB, including the proposed methodology and process for
    implementation;

-   if endorsed by the SB, set-up cooperation agreement, liaising with
    the other parties as necessary.

#### Executive Secretariat (ES)

The mission of the ES is composed of four items:

-   Programme function in support to TA to:

<!-- -->

-   build the Work-plan to be endorsed by the SB (e.g. programmatic,
    resources);

-   monitor and support the implementation of the Work-plan including
    finalization and notification of the publication of ECSS
    documents/events;

-   ensure implementation and perform monitoring of the ECSS processes
    (including those to gather feedback from users and lessons learned).

<!-- -->

-   Support WGs and enforce drafting rules.

-   Custodian and configuration control of the ECSS documents;

-   Ensure the promotion of ECSS and interface with other SDOs;

-   Provide administrative support to SB and TA.

#### Working Group (WG)

The mission of an ECSS Working Group is to carry out the tasks necessary
to draft or update an ECSS Document in line with its Terms of Reference,
against an agreed planning and schedule. They are built on a case by
case basis, managed by the TA through a limited duration mandate.

#### Network of experts (NoE)

The network of experts is a pool of experts appointed by the TA and
supported by the ECSS organizations nominating them. They act for
specific mission/action through the sponsorship of the TA members or
their nominating organization.

The NoE is composed by the Document and Discipline Focal Points and ad
hoc experts, providing support in specific tasks. The NoE are not an
advisory body intended for the general public. Their support is
restricted to the SB, TA and ES.

ECSS decision making process
----------------------------

[]{#_Ref338088034 .anchor}In this document consensus is defined as not
only a way to seek the agreement of most participants, but also to
resolve or mitigate the objections of the minority to achieve the most
acceptable general agreement. As a consequence, minority views are
considered to a greater degree than where a majority can take a decision
and enforce it without any further consideration of the minority views.

a.  []{#_Ref339384790 .anchor}The ECSS governing bodies (i.e. the ECSS
    SB and TA) make decisions on the following basis:

<!-- -->

1.  After having considered the position of all Full members, associated
    and observers, the governing body works on the basis of achieving
    consensus of the voting members (i.e. full members).

2.  If consensus as stated in a.1 above cannot be achieved, decisions
    are made by the vote of the full members, with a simple majority
    subject that a quorum of 50% of the voting rights is reached.

Votes are weighted in accordance with the following principles:

a.  One (1) vote for each ECSS full member National Space Agency.

b.  Four (4) votes for the European Industry, represented by Eurospace.

<!-- -->

1.  Eurospace can decide to appoint four Eurospace voting
    representatives, with one voting right each, or to concentrate the
    four votes with a voting representative, or any intermediate
    solution.

    a.  ECSS WGs make all decisions on the following basis:

        1.  by achieving consensus of all the WG members officially
            approved by the ECSS TA.

        2.  If consensus, cannot be achieved on a particular issue, the
            matter is escalated to the TA for resolution.

Implementation details of these principles can be found in Chapter 4 of
ECSS-D-00 “ECSS organization and processes”.

\
ECSS Documentation
==================

Overview
--------

ECSS documentation is divided into 2 categories:

-   Documents for developers of standards specifying objectives,
    policies, processes, rules, standard forms;

-   Documents for users, composed of standards and supporting documents,
    which collectively form the ECSS System, addressing the aspects of:

<!-- -->

-   ECSS system description and implementation,

-   Space project management,

-   Space product assurance

-   Space engineering, and

-   Space sustainability.

1.  For space sustainability definition, see 3.2.3.

Documentation for developers
----------------------------

Architecture of ECSS documentation for developers of standards is
depicted in Figure 7‑1:

![](/home/sdias/Desktop/papper_docs/ecss/1-Active_ECSS/generated/ECSS-P-00C(22March2013).docx1//media/image3.emf){width="4.2690682414698164in"
height="2.6564074803149604in"}

[[]{#_Toc351715557 .anchor}]{#_Ref315193739 .anchor}Figure 7‑1:
Architecture of ECSS documentation for developers

The present document (ECSS-P-00: Standardization policy) is the highest
level document providing objectives and policies applicable to the
development, maintenance and deployment of standards, handbooks and
technical memoranda, and defining the ECSS structure. The cooperation
agreements between SDOs and ECSS are kept/archived by ES and constitute
essential elements for the implementation of the actual ECSS policy.

All the ECSS internal processes are specified in ECSS-D-00. This
document also identifies all the items which are under configuration
control by ECSS, together with the stage at which they have to be put
under configuration control.

The ECSS drafting rules and template for ECSS standards and for
handbooks are specified in ECSS-D-00-01 and ECSS-D-00-02 respectively.
They specify all the editorial rules necessary to guarantee high quality
and maintainability of the ECSS system.

An ECSS configuration management document specifies the configuration
control system and processes for the ECSS system.

In order to keep consistency between the two documentation sets, the
document for users: “ECSS Glossary of terms” described in 7.3 is also
applicable to developers.

Documentation for users (ECSS System)
-------------------------------------

The architecture of the ECSS system, shown in Figure 7‑2, is composed
of:

-   A System description and implementation standard (ECSS-S-ST-00)
    which specifies how to use the ECSS system in a given project;

-   A Glossary of terms (ECSS-S-ST-00-01) which provides definition of
    terms common to several ECSS standards (terms specific to a standard
    are defined locally in that standard);

-   Standards (ST), Handbooks (HB) and Technical Memoranda (TM)
    organized to cover: space project management, space product
    assurance, space engineering and space sustainability. Inside each
    branch, the three types of documents are classified in disciplines.
    For each discipline, a top level standard provides all the general
    requirements related to that discipline, while other documents cover
    specific aspects, processes, products within a given discipline.

Detailed descriptions of the architecture, content and ECSS disciplines
are provided in clause 5.3 of ECSS-S-ST-00.[[]{#_Toc288222471
.anchor}]{#_Toc288222470 .anchor}

[[]{#_Toc351715558 .anchor}]{#_Ref351714924 .anchor}Figure 7‑2: General
Architecture of ECSS documentation for users

 Bibliography

  ECSS-D-00         ECSS – ECSS processes
  ----------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------
  ECSS-D-00-01      ECSS - Drafting rules and template for ECSS Standards
  ECSS-D-00-02      ECSS - Drafting rules and template for ECSS Handbooks
  ECSS-S-ST-00      ECSS system - Description, implementation and general requirements
  ECSS-S-ST-00-01   ECSS system – Glossary of terms
